FIFA: World Cup Soccer | Encyclopedia.com       Skip to main content                    EXPLORE EXPLORE Earth and Environment History Literature and the Arts Medicine People Philosophy and Religion Places Plants and Animals Science and Technology Social Sciences and the Law Sports and Everyday Life Additional References Articles Daily        Sports  Sports fitness recreation and leisure magazines  FIFA: World Cup Soccer FIFA: World Cup Soccer gale views  updated              FIFA: World Cup SoccerSoccer, known as football outside of North America, is the "beautiful game" to its multitudes of fans.
Soccer is played in every corner of the world and inspires its own frenzy every four years with the convening of the international championship known as the World Cup.
There is no competition on Earth that mobilizes such passion or that is as inclusive as the qualification for this event.The World Cup is entirely controlled through the international governing body for the sport of soccer, FIFA, the French language acronym for the Federation Internationale de Football Association.
A testament to the status of soccer as the world's most popular sport, FIFA is unquestionably the most powerful and all-encompassing world sports body.
Unlike other global sports such as basketball, where there is a lack of international unanimity regarding the rules of the sport, FIFA, through both custom and stature, reigns supreme.The first organized soccer governance occurred in 1863, with the founding of the Football Association in England.
The Football Association codified its rules of play, and as international competition began to be more popular among European teams in the latter part of the nineteenth century, there arose an increasing interest in the formation of a corresponding governing body.
FIFA was created for this purpose in 1904.
FIFA's membership and authority over the game increased each year thereafter.
The first World Cup championship took place in Uruguay in 1930, and, other than the intervention of World War II, the World Cup has been held every four years since that time.FIFA is responsible for many aspects of the governance of international soccer, including the sanction of a multitude of age group championships for both men and women, the maintenance of a world-ranking system, the resolution of issues pertaining to the nationality of players, and the annual review of the rules of the game.
Technical innovations such as the use of goal line cameras and high technology balls are items falling under the authority of FIFA.
The greatest ongoing responsibility undertaken by this organization is the organizing of the World Cup.Every member country organization (virtually every country in the world) has the right to attempt to qualify for a World Cup.
Qualification begins almost three years in advance of each tournament, with each country placed in one of six qualification groups, based upon geography.
A fixed number of teams from each group will qualify for the World Cup; by rule, the host country and the defending champion are provided an automatic position.
The FIFA groups include Africa; Asia; Europe; North America, Central America, and the Caribbean; Oceania; and South America.Thirty-two teams are ultimately selected to play in the tournament.
Once the teams have qualified, FIFA, using its ranking system, will then seed the top eight teams in the competition, and each seeded team will be placed at the head of a pool of four teams, referred to as a "group."
The seeding process, which has a significant competitive impact, is based on a formula employed by FIFA that takes into account the play of each of the selected teams over the previous three years.
The balance of the teams is grouped according to a random draw.
Traditionally, there is one group of four teams that is very evenly matched and where no team, irrespective of seeding, has a clear advantage heading into tournament play.
Such pools are referred to as a "Group of Death."
The announcement of the World Cup seedings is a much-anticipated event; the seedings are typically determined six months in advance of the World Cup competition.The World Cup competition, from the preliminary round games through the Cup final, will last approximately one month.
Teams are permitted rest days between competitions.
As a number of venues are employed in a World Cup, the competitors and their supporters will generally be required to travel to different locations within the host country as the games are played.
Security at World Cup matches has been a more prominent feature of the event in recent tournaments; some countries with supporters that have reputations for rowdiness are the subject of intense scrutiny.FIFA are also responsible for the approval of the stadiums in which the competitions will take place.
Unlike sports such as American football or baseball, FIFA is extremely particular about the nature and quality of the surfaces on which its competitions are held.
For many years, FIFA would not sanction any international soccer game to be played on an artificial surface, citing both a higher injury rate and unnatural ball movements on such surfaces.
In recent years, with significant improvements being made in artificial turf construction, FIFA has authorized a number of test competitions using artificial surfaces; while the 2006 World Cup (won in overtime by Italy) in Germany was played on natural grass, it is anticipated that significant international events, including a future World Cup, may be performed on artificial surfaces.see also International federations; Soccer; Sport psychology.
World of Sports Science  ×  Cite this article   Pick a style below, and copy the text for your bibliography.
MLA Chicago APA "FIFA: World Cup Soccer ."
World of Sports Science.
.
Encyclopedia.com.
23 Feb. 2023 <https://www.encyclopedia.com>.
"FIFA: World Cup Soccer ."
World of Sports Science.
.
Encyclopedia.com.
(February 23, 2023).
https://www.encyclopedia.com/sports/sports-fitness-recreation-and-leisure-magazines/fifa-world-cup-soccer "FIFA: World Cup Soccer ."
World of Sports Science.
.
Retrieved February 23, 2023 from Encyclopedia.com:  https://www.encyclopedia.com/sports/sports-fitness-recreation-and-leisure-magazines/fifa-world-cup-soccer Learn more about citation styles  Citation styles Encyclopedia.com gives you the ability to cite reference entries and articles according to common styles from the Modern Language Association (MLA), The Chicago Manual of Style, and the American Psychological Association (APA).
Within the “Cite this article” tool, pick a style to see how all available information looks when formatted according to that style.
Then, copy and paste the text into your bibliography or works cited list.
Because each style has its own formatting nuances that evolve over time and not all information is available for every reference entry or article, Encyclopedia.com cannot guarantee each citation it generates.
Therefore, it’s best to use Encyclopedia.com citations as a starting point before checking the style against your school or publication’s requirements and the most-recent information available at these sites:Modern Language Associationhttp://www.mla.org/styleThe Chicago Manual of Stylehttp://www.chicagomanualofstyle.org/tools_citationguide.htmlAmerican Psychological Associationhttp://apastyle.apa.org/Notes: Most online reference entries and articles do not have page numbers.
Therefore, that information is unavailable for most Encyclopedia.com content.
However, the date of retrieval is often important.
Refer to each style’s convention regarding the best way to format page numbers and retrieval dates.
In addition to the MLA, Chicago, and APA styles, your school, university, publication, or institution may have its own requirements for citations.
Therefore, be sure to refer to those guidelines when editing your bibliography or works cited list.
More From encyclopedia.com     World Cup  ,   The World Cup of football, or soccer as the game is called in the United States, is the most popular sporting event in the world.
For two years, team…         Rugby (england)  ,   Rugby Rugby is the only major sport in the world named not for the nature of its primary element, but for the place where the game is reputed to have…         Pele (soccer Player)  ,   Pelé Athlete, sports commentator Retired Brazilian soccer player Edson Arantes do Nascimento, better known as Pelé, is among the greatest and most ce…         Basketball  ,   In December of 1891, the administration at the School for Christian Workers in Springfield, Massachusetts, faced a problem.
The excess energies of a…         Soccer  ,   Soccer To its worldwide following of fans who number in the hundreds of millions, soccer is "the beautiful game."
Soccer is the world's most popular…         Cricket (game)  ,   Cricket Cricket is a sport that generates a broad range of reaction from sports fans.
Among those who are a part of more action-packed athletic tradi…    About this articleFIFA: World Cup Soccer  Updated    About encyclopedia.com content   Print Article You Might Also Like  Fédération Internationale de Football Association   International Federations   FIBA: International Basketball   Harlem Globetrotters International, Inc.   Soccer: Women's World Cup, 1999   Football (Soccer)   Milla, Roger 1952–   Terim, Fatih (1954–) NEARBY TERMS  FIFA World Cup football finals   FIEx   Fièvre   Fiévet, Paul   FIET   Fiestas   fiesta   Fiessinger, Noël   Fiesole, Guido da (Fra Angelico), Bl.
Fiesole   Fieser, Louis Frederick   Fieschi, Giuseppe   Fies, Brian   Fiery Angel, The   fiery   Fierstein, Harvey 1954–   Fierstein, Harvey (Forbes)   Fierstein, Harvey (1954—)   Fierstein, Harvey   Fierro Rimac, Francisco (1803–1879)   Fierrabras   Fieri Facias   FIERE   Fierce People   Fierce Creatures  FIFA: World Cup Soccer  FIFCLC   FIFDU   Fife, Graeme   fifer   FIFF   Fiffer, Sharon 1951-   Fifi   Fifield, Christopher G(eorge)   Fifield, Elaine (1930–1999)   FIFireE   FIFSP   FIFST   fifteen   Fifteen rising   fifteenth   Fifteenth Amendment (Framing And Ratification)   Fifteenth Amendment (Judicial Interpretation)   Fifteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution   Fifteenth-Century Body Decorations   Fifteenth-Century Clothing   Fifteenth-Century Footwear   Fifteenth-Century Headwear   Fifth Amendment   Fifth Avenue Girl   Fifth Day of Peace  Footer menu Home About Us Help Site Feedback Privacy & Cookie Policy Terms and Conditions Daily © 2019 Encyclopedia.com | All rights reserved.
